---
title: gwt-mpv-apt 1.1
description: ""
date: 2010-06-28T00:00:00Z
tags: ["GWT"]
---


**Update 2011/12/29:** This post was originally about the `gwt-mpv-apt` project, which has since been merged into/rechristened Tessell, see [tessell.org](http://www.tessell.org).

`gwt-mpv-apt` is a annotation processor (natively supported by Eclipse and `javac`) that generates `gwt-dispatch` and `GwtEvents` for GWT projects.

The benefit is **a 10x decrease in boilerplate code**, which is something every GWT project needs.

The [github page](http://github.com/stephenh/gwt-mpv-apt) is pretty self-explanatory, but the basic idea is that `gwt-mpv-apt` can generate both your Action and Result command-pattern DTOs and then also your GWT event DTOs from "spec" classes that contain only the minimal amount of information needed to derive the resulting DTOs.

Manually Creating Action/Result DTOs
------------------------------------

Let's start out without `gwt-mpv-apt` and see how things typically work.

For example, if you were writing a `gwt-dispatch` Action/Result by hand for creating a new `User`, you'd have to:

1. Make a `NewUserAction` class
1. Have it implement the `Action<NewUserResult>` interface
1. Add a field/getter/setter for `String username`
1. Add a protected `NewUserAction` constructor for serialization
1. Add a public constructor for `NewUserAction(String username)` for real usage
1. Add a default `serialVersionUID` to avoid the Eclipse warning (assuming the warning is enabled)
1. Make a `NewUserResult` class
1. Have it implement the `Result` interface
1. Add a field/getter/setter for `boolean success`, and `Integer newUserId`
1. Add a protected `NewUserResult` constructor for serialization
1. Add a public constructor for `NewUserResult(boolean success, Integer newUserId)` for real usage
1. Add a default `serialVersionUID` to avoid the Eclipse warning (assuming the warning is enabled)
1. If you want caching add `hashCode/equals` to `NewUserAction`
1. If you want nice debugging add `toString` to `NewUserAction`
1. If you want nice debugging add `toString` to `NewUserResult`

In the end, you'll end up with something like:

```java
public class NewUserAction implements Action<NewUserResult> {
  private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;
  private String username;

  public NewUserAction(String username) {
    this.username = username;
  }

  protected NewUserAction() {
  }

  public String getUsername() {
    return this.username;
  }

  @Override
  public int hashCode() {
      int hashCode = 23;
      hashCode = (hashCode * 37) + getClass().hashCode();
      hashCode = (hashCode * 37) + (username == null ? 1 : username.hashCode());
      return hashCode;
  }

  @Override
  public boolean equals(Object other) {
      if (other != null && other.getClass().equals(this.getClass())) {
          NewUserAction o = (NewUserAction) other;
          return (o.username == null && this.username == null)
                 || (o.username != null && o.username.equals(this.username));
      }
      return false;
  }

  @Override
  public String toString() {
      return "NewUserAction[" + username + "]";
  }
}

public class NewUserResult implements Result {
  private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;
  private boolean success;
  private Integer newUserId;

  public NewUserResult(boolean success, Integer newUserId) {
    this.success = success;
    this.newUserId = newUserId;
  }

  protected NewUserResult() {
  }

  public boolean getSuccess() {
    return this.success;
  }

  public Integer getNewUserId() {
    return this.newUserId;
  }

  @Override
  public String toString() {
      return "NewUserResult[" + success + "," + newUserId + "]";
  }
}
```

So, roughly 15 steps leading to 60 LOC.

Which isn't necessarily a big deal, until you have to repeat it for every Action/Result pair in your project.

Generating Action/Result DTOs
-----------------------------

So, let's try this again. If we think about it, what are we really trying to do?

We have 1 operation: creating a new user. We know it should take 1 input parameter (`username`) and return two output parameters (`success` and `newUserId`).

With `gwt-mpv-apt`, we can specify this directly by:

1. Make a new `NewUserSpec` class
1. Add a `String in1username` field (`in1` == first input parameter)
1. Add a `boolean out1success` field (`out1` == first output parameter)
1. Add a `Integer out2newUserId` field (`out2` == second output parameter)
1. Add a `GenDispatch` annotation

So, it while look like:

```java
@GenDispatch
public class NewUserSpec {
  String in1username;
  boolean out1success;
  Integer out2newUserId;
}
```

And that's it.

`gwt-mpv-apt` will step in (if you're in Eclipse **as soon as you hit Save**), and generate the `NewUserAction` and `NewUserResult` classes that look exactly like the ~60 lines of boilerplate above from this 6 lines of spec.

That's an **order of magnitude** decrease in LOC (60 -> 6) and a **3x decrease in manual steps** (15 -> 5).

Adding Up The Savings
---------------------

Saving ~50 LOC for one example is good. But, even better, this savings is applied to every command `Action/Result` in your project.

I'm currently writing what I consider a small project, and it has 20 command patterns. So, 50 LOC `x` 20 commands = 1,000 LOC I didn't have to write.

So, pretty quickly, we're talking about real LOC that `gwt-mpv-apt` should save you.

Events Too
----------

I'll do another post sometime with the details of `gwt-mpv-apt`'s GWT event support, but for now I'll leave you with a short of example:

```java
@GenEvent
public class FooChangedEventSpec {
  Foo p1foo;
}
```

That will generate a `FooChangedEvent`, `FooChangedHandler`, and all sorts of other boilerplate that, if you've written GWT events before, you'll know is a PITA to type out each time.

Getting `gwt-mpv-apt`
---------------------

The [github page](http://github.com/stephenh/gwt-mpv-apt) is the best place to go.


